hello everybody this is a planetarium
show and it's set for the 1st of May
so we'll show you the sky as it would be
for that date and for the most part
it'll be pretty much the same for the
whole of May with one or two things
moving around and of course the moon
being the main one but it will show you
the main constellations and positions of
the planets for the month of May so
let's begin so what I'm going to do is
flew over and we'll watch the Sun go
down which late afternoon early evening
at the moment and we can run time
forwards so that the Sun accelerates
down towards the horizon and speed
things up a little bit and as of course
the Sun sets you get that lovely orange
color in the sky created as the light
from the Sun is being bent through the
Earth's atmosphere there it goes down
below the trees and down below the
horizon we get that sunset color and of
course the sky begins to darken now what
we find straight away in the evening sky
in May is the planet Venus here very
very bright it's the first thing that
will become visible and you just can't
miss it
but with this planetarium software we
can zoom right in this is the sort of
view that you get with powerful
telescope the one that I'm using at my
observatory shows it up very nicely now
Venus is looking as about as large as it
ever looks at the moment because it's
really quite close to the earth
it's just swinging by us on the inside
will overtake us shortly and that's why
we're seeing that crescent shape of the
light side where the light is coming
from the side towards the Sun so a zoom
back away from Venus we really don't get
to see very much detail on the planets
because all we're looking at is the
light reflected back to us from the very
thick cloud tops venus has an atlas
that's about a hundred times as dense as
our own and unless you happen to have a
space probe and drop it down through the
clouds
you really don't see anything even with
the most powerful telescopes
so there it is glowing brightly in the
sky we'll let time run forward now and
get ourselves to the point where we've
got a properly dark skies now of course
in May the sky is beginning to remain
light for a very long time
the winter is often the better time for
doing astronomy but we'll go right
through till 11 p.m. and at that point
Venus will just about to be on the verge
down here disappearing towards the
horizon we'll just bring that to a halt
there and the next object we're going to
go and look at is the moon and the moon
is showing a lovely half phase at the
moment that's perfect because you can
see all of the detail in the partially
shaded craters all along the day-night
boundary that's called the Terminator
and you can also see the big moiré the
dark round areas on the moon there those
are ancient impact basins where huge
space rocks hit the moon and punctured
the crust well worth having a look at
pull back away from the moon that's
sitting in a constellation of Leo just
next door is the constellation cancer
and on the right hand side we've got the
two stars of Gemini there but there's
the stick drawing of cancer the crab and
a bit of leo the lion up there to the
side where the moon is so we can show
you the artwork for those cancer and Leo
as I say the bright stars to the right
of cancer are Custer and Pollux they're
heavenly twins of Gemini now what we're
going to do is just zoom in on perhaps
their favorite objects right in the
center of cancer the crab and that's
called the Beehive cluster very nice
object to look at with binoculars
there's a hundreds of stars all gather
together and they were born together out
of one cloud of gas and dust so they're
all about the same age and they're
gradually going to disperse over time as
they have near-misses with each other
and gravitational slingshots throw stars
out willy-nilly all over the
galaxies to go and do their own thing
that's what happens to these clusters
they gradually sort of boil away as
stars escape from them so that's the
Beehive cluster now we're going to swing
over have a bit more of a look at Leo
the Lion and is one of the
constellations where I can kind of see
how they make a lion out of the stick
diagram it's sort of obvious where the
head and the body and the tail are not
all the constellations are like that
there again is Leo and next door we've
got cancer that we looked at just now so
we'll take the artwork away and we look
at one or two of the objects in Leo and
Leos frameless for containing some very
nice galaxies and some groups of
galaxies so here is a trio of galaxies
just there and they go by the Messier
catalog numbers 95 96 and 105 these
three these are numbers of items that
were catalogued by Charles Messier a
French astronomer he was very interested
in colet's here's another galaxy this
one's a very nice barred spiral galaxy
one of my favorites it's one that
Charles Messier missed I call it the
Catherine Wheel galaxy its designation
is NGC 2903 but very nice prominent
spiral arms and really quite bright I
don't understand quite how Messier
didn't manage to include that in his
catalog and that was just off the face
of Leo the Lion they're quite close to
the moon on the first so perhaps a
different night would be better for
observing it next constellation around
after leo is Virgo and here we have the
stick diagram and okay I can see a
couple of legs in a couple of arms and a
body so I guess that this makes out the
shape of a person but here she is the
lovely Virgo and she's laid out there
across the sky
let's take her away Virgo is very
definitely the realm of the galaxies
there's a huge super cluster of galaxies
that we are heading towards literally in
space as well as zooming in on them here
with the stellarium software the big
elliptical galaxies in the middle there
the m87 is the one in which the
scientists were able to photograph the
black hole at the center so here's the
high-resolution space image of this
group of galaxies about 50 million light
years away and there are dozens and
dozens of them all captured by gravity
and the Milky Way is heading towards it
so we pull back away from the Virgo
cluster of galaxies there
there are almost so many that when you
go surfing around with a telescope in
that region you really can't miss them
and we'll move on now just a little bit
further into the night move through to
midnight so the sky is rotating
one or two satellites whizzing across as
we let time run fast that's the moon
over to the right-hand side and the
other bright object there is the star
Arcturus in the constellation of Bootes
the herdsman
so now we're going to go and look at one
of the constellations that is the most
famous of all and that's Ursa Major the
Great Bear which contains their grouping
of stars that you'd recognize as the
plough or the saw sperm or the Big
Dipper and the Big Dipper is actually
got its tail just off the top of the
screen at the moment but there's the
body of the Great Bear it's one of the
biggest constellations on the sky covers
a huge area so we take him away and
we'll go and have a look at a star in
the tail of the Great Bear here on the
sauce Panhandle it's the middle one of
the three that make up the tail and even
with the naked eye you can see that it's
a double star and we call the two
components Mizar and Alcor but with a
powerful telescope or with this software
we can zoom right in we zoom in on my zr
here and eventually you realize that
what you're looking at is two stars and
you can just about make that out there
it turns out that Mizar is a double and
so is Alcor so there's at least four
stars in this system all doing a
complicated dance around each other
under the influence of gravity but now
we're just going to go slightly to the
right of the tail of the bear this is
fuzzy patch and as we zoom in on that
what we find is the pinwheel galaxy this
is a classic spiral galaxy with those
spiral arms round fairly tightly around
the little nucleus in the middle there
there's the high resolution image of it
we can pull that in and show it in much
more detail
you always get that slight yellow color
to the centre of the galaxy and the
bluer colour out in the spiral arms and
that's because new stars are being born
in the spiral arms and where new stars
are born you find a very energetic hot
blue stars but they don't last long so
once the star formation process ceases
then all the blue stars quickly burn out
they're burning so hot
here's another galaxy in fact this is
the Whirlpool Galaxy and it's little
neighboring dwarf galaxy has come too
close to it there at the top and a
bridge of
Tyrael has formed between them and the
large Whirlpool Galaxy is eating its
smaller neighbor that's how galaxies
grow large galaxies eat small wunens
it's a cannibalistic process and they
eventually merge together pull in all
the material and then the galaxies get
larger and larger different kind of
object here this is the owl nebula this
is the death of a sun-like star a little
white dot in the center there is their
remains of the star a white dwarf the
core of the star has been left behind
and the outer layers have been puffed
off into that greenish colored smoke
ring we'll see another example of that
later on in tonight's tour just next to
it there's a galaxy that's another
spiral galaxy rather edge-on to us so
you can't see the spiral arms very well
just about make it out and this one is
even further away 45 million light years
so this is really getting quite distant
so the light has been traveling for 45
million years before it got to earth and
was captured to make the images here
we'll pull back away from that and look
at another pair of galaxies also in so
major the Great Bear and they're down
towards the right so I can just see them
already as we zoom in they'll get bigger
and clearer on the left we have the
lovely spiral galaxy bodes galaxy
Charles Messier object number 81 and
just next to it to the right there is M
82 the cigar galaxy now we're going to
zoom in on the cigar galaxy because
something really rather weird is going
on in the middle here it's being
disrupted there's a lot of red material
shooting out from the center and that's
because this rather small galaxy had a
near-miss with its large neighbor about
six million years ago and triggered off
a whole burst of activity and it's even
twisted the cigar galaxy a little bit in
the center there the gravity of its
large neighbor
doing all that damage so we'll pull back
and we're going to look now just here at
the little bear so minor looks a bit
like a miniature version of its larger
brother even like a miniature version of
the plough
you got that rectangular grouping with
the big long tail now if you know
anything about bears you should perhaps
realize that bears don't have big long
tails and but that's what the Greeks
decided these objects were so that's
what we stick with a tip of the Bears
tails very important star though and
that's the pole star Polaris or North
Star you can always find this and if you
locate it in the sky it'll be in the
direction that's north of you if you're
in the southern hemisphere you can't see
it at all if you're at the North Pole
it's directly above your head and the
angle changes as you move further south
it's also a very interesting star
because it's a very special type that
helps us measure the distance to other
stars but as the sky rotates around
rerunning time forwards now and letting
the night evolve onwards you see that
Polaris because it's lined up with the
Earth's spin axis stay still whereas all
the other stars seem to move around it
there we go and run time backwards so
that things it back across the screen
and we'll put it back to midnight before
we move on so as you can see Polaris
right aligned with the pole there stays
perfectly stationary we'll just get that
back to where we started keep things
tidy there we are
and we'll move on
I was saying that Polaris is a star that
allows us to measure the distance that's
because it's a special kind of star
called a Cepheid variable that pulsates
according to how massive it is so if we
measure the pulsation periods then we
can work out how bright it ought to be
and from abroad how bright it appears we
can see how far away it is here's the
constellation of Hercules the hero again
a body and some sticky legs and sticky
out arms just about makes sense he is of
course upside down in this diagram most
objects in astronomy tend to end up
being upside down for one reason or
another but here here is Hercules the
hero and one of my favorite objects to
go hunting for with our medium sized
telescope even visible with binoculars
though is the great globular cluster
just here along one edge of Hercules
body this is a group of about half a
million stars all packed together into a
tight ball and here's the
high-resolution image of it it looks
like jewels on a velvet background when
you look at it through a telescope one
of the first objects I ever looked at
through a powerful scope but there are
several of these in Hercules here's
another one and they are about
twenty-five twenty-six thousand
light-years away so just outside of our
own Milky Way galaxy and it's possible
that they're the cause of small galaxies
that the Milky Way has devoured it's
pulled all of their more loosely
attached material away and just left
these tightly packed cause behind and we
think there might be a small black hole
in the center of each of these globular
clusters there about 400 of them
scattered around the outside of the
Milky Way and other galaxies have them
as well we've detected them elsewhere
now we're going to move next door to the
constellation of Lyra the lyre which is
a Greek musical instrument looks like a
parallelogram of faint stars with one
bright one at the corner there
there's the musical instrument it's
supposed to represent I can't quite make
that out myself and Hercules up to the
top right now the bright star here is
Vega and it's a hot white start 9,000
degrees so our Sun is only 5,800 degrees
and this one is perhaps 25 light-years
away from us putting out about 40 times
the energy which is why it appears to be
one of the brighter stars in the sky it
is quite powerful but by no means a
monster but it is relatively close as
well 25 light years is not that far
across the galaxy as one of the sun's
nearer neighbors they featured in the
movie contact now here's the ring nebula
this is the classic example of a star
like the Sun that has died puffed off
its outer layers into a smoke ring and
left behind the dead white dwarf star a
nuclear reactor core at the center there
you can see it right in the middle of
the Ring very nice objects go and find
you do need a medium-sized telescope for
that one it's quite a small object it's
quite a reasonable amount of
magnification so that's the ring nebula
in the constellation of Lyra
so we'll just pull back now running
across the bottom of the screen here
we've got the path of the Milky Way
those are millions of stars of the
spiral arm of our galaxy and running
down the length of is the constellation
of Cygnus the Swan there goes the
International Space Station across the
screen one or two other satellites and
accelerating time to move us on to 4:15
a.m. because apart from Venus which we
saw at the beginning I'm showing you any
planets yet and that's because three of
them are hiding in the pre-dawn sky all
grouped together so we go and have a
look at
so we'll accelerate time forwards loads
of satellites flying around miss
Stellarium software knows we have a lot
of them and just down here now we've
arrived at 4:15 a.m. and this is the
constellation of Sagittarius the Archer
but again I'm afraid I can see a teapot
not a man on a horse firing a burn arrow
there's the artwork that's supposed to
go with that one and Sagittarius is a
constellation that has a big thick piece
of the Milky Way running through it
we're looking almost towards the middle
of our Milky Way galaxy when we're
looking in this direction and there are
loads of star clouds and a lot of these
gaseous nebula this is the Eagle Nebula
and right in the center there you can
see the iconic outline of the pillars of
creation made famous by the photograph
taken by the Hubble Space Telescope of
these star forming regions of cold gas
is the Swan nebula it's another of these
star forming regions where clouds of gas
are collapsing together under their own
gravity and new stars and new star
clusters will be formed so there's the
Swan nebula that's one that is there but
it's upside down it's quite hard to see
here's the Lagoon Nebula and again you
can see the star forming process has
taken hold here there's the remains of
the cloud of gas but a whole new star
cluster is beginning to burst into life
right in the middle of the Lagoon Nebula
there that red color is characteristic
of hydrogen gas the most common elements
but here's the trifid nebula where in
addition to the red we've also got a lot
of blue light because here there's some
very powerful blue stars being formed
and the light from them is bouncing back
off the gas giving us either the blue or
the purple tinge to the reflections from
the star clouds and one or two dark dust
lanes running across it as well so
pull back away from the star clouds of
Sagittarius there and swing a bit over
to the left-hand side which is where
we're going to find all of those planets
all nicely lined up for us in the sky so
we'll go and have a look at those and
the first one that we're going to go for
is Jupiter the largest of the planets
it's larger than all the other planets
put together this is what it would look
like with a small telescope when you
first see it you'd see the four moons
and the disk of the planet with a couple
of dark cloud belts across it but if you
have a more powerful telescope then you
can zoom in more and get to see more
detail so let's do that now and see what
we can find
here we go we're zooming in the lots
more detail in the cloud belts you can
see the two main equatorial belts and
you can just see the red spot beginning
to peep around from the left there this
planetarium software knows the position
of the red spot according to the time
and so it correctly shows you what you
would see now we're going to pull back
and we're going to have a little look at
each of the moons first one here
io is the nearest of the large for
orbiting the planet Jupiter in just 1.6
of our earth days looks like a pizza
it's actually covered not in cheese but
in sulfur four different colors of
sulphur black red yellow and white all
mixed together on the surface and every
one of those black dots is an active
volcano on the surface of this little
moon about the same size as our own
earth it's moon next door the second
moon of Jupiter working our way out is
Europa this is an ice-covered moon with
grooves and cracks that seem to be using
some sort of dirty brown organic
material up from beneath and we think
they're underneath the ice is an ocean
salt warm salty ocean in which they
might be living creatures and that might
be accounting for that Brown
ganic material largest moon in the solar
system this third one out is Ganymede
Ganymede is the same size or larger than
the planet Mercury so if in orbited the
Sun we would call it a planet but in
orbits Jupiter so we call it a moon
covered in ice floes and a few craters
so it's a mixed terrain and again could
well have underneath that ice ice warm
salty ocean according to our
measurements now we move over to the
outer moon Callisto of the big four and
we find a much different surface this
one is covered in craters and no real
sign of anything having changed apart
from more and more craters having landed
on its where space rocks have crashed
into it created holes in it so a very
old surface therefore Callisto and
that's - is about the same size as the
planet Mercury Jupiter's got lots of
other moons they keep finding more I
think they're up to 79 last time I
checked and then next door we've got the
other really giant planet Saturn not
quite as big as Jupiter and of course
has a family of moons shown there quite
a few of them you can easily pick up
some of those even with binoculars but
of course it has the Rings binoculars
we'll just about show you that the
planets not round but a small telescope
will show you the Rings quite nicely and
a medium-sized or larger will just
improve the view so here we go the
medium telescope a large telescope and
now we're zooming right in you can see
the fantastic structure of the cloud
belts on the planet there and the Rings
with the gap sin then the dark gaps
those are caused by interactions of the
millions of particles that are make up
the Rings all orbiting round with the
gravity of some of the moons is one of
them Titan again this is a planet sized
moon it's about the same size as planet
Mercury
covered in its own thick smoggy
atmosphere that's about 50% more dense
than the Earth's atmosphere and full of
interesting organic compounds and
dropped a probe arc through that to find
out what the surface was like and found
lakes of liquid methane and rivers of
the same material
so in fascinating world in its own right
so-called back away from Saturn now and
over to the left-hand side there you can
see already another bright object just
above the horizon red in color and
that's the planet Mars
so we'll zoom in on Mars watch for its
two little moons when they show up so
here's the disk there's Phobos and
Deimos fear and terror they named
because Mars is the God of War and
there's the three quarter phase disk of
Mars but the Earth's gradually closing
in on Mars catching up with it well I
would take it on the inside later this
year but if we zoom right in on this
we'll see the detail of the dark dusty
regions and the red rusty colored areas
a little bit of a white polar cap
they're just showing down to the woods
at the bottom of the screen where the
day/night boundary on Mars is revealed
Martha's a fascinating world in its own
right as I could give a whole lecture on
the subject of Mars and the history of
it and possibilities for life
so that was a whistle-stop tour in 30
minutes of the things that you could
look out for in the night sky of May 20
20 and now we're just going to let time
run forwards and the Sun will soon come
up from the east and the stars will fade
away so I do hope you enjoyed that do go
out and have a look for some of these
objects either with binoculars or if
you're lucky enough to have a telescope
and of course you'll see lots of
satellites flying around particularly at
the moment the StarLink satellites you
can find out when those are available
there are various websites that will
tell you when to look out for them
and they really are interesting to see
if you haven't seen them